**March Madness Wins Model**

The goal of this project is to develop a model to accurately predict the outcomes of March Madness basketball games at a rate higher than simply selecting the higher seed. The final product is a Logistic Regression model that utilizes difference in seed, the difference in season average for statistics like free throw percentage and turnover margin, alongside a win probability generated by a complex Monte Carlo simulation model. Trained and validated on a data set of the March Madness games from 2023-2025, this model returns higher accuracy than a “chalk” (choosing the better seed) decision model. 

The code for producing new model predictions can be found in new_predictions_pipeline.py

**Monte Carlo Simulation**

The Monte Carlo simulation model is made up of seven component models trained to predict aspects of the basketball game which influence the number of points scored: number of possessions, number of field goals attempted, percentage of two-point field goals made, number of three-point field goals attempted, percentage of three-point field goals made, number of free throws attempted, and percentage of free throws made.

Each component model is a Gradient Boosting Regressor model from scikit-learn trained to predict a given target variable from the list above. For hyperparameter selection, I minimized RMSE using 10-fold cross validation. I used an iterative process for feature selection. The list of available features for each included season average statistics available at NCAA.com for the team and their opponent, along with the team seed, the opponent seed, and any previously computed components (components are computed in the order listed above). I started with the features that would be most impactful intuitively (ex. season average FT% for the FT% model), trained and evaluated the model, then re-trained the model with a modified feature set, adding or removing one feature at a time, then committing the changes which had the biggest impact on validation RMSE.

These component models are all stored along with their RMSE on the full data set. In the overall Monte Carlo model, I also store a covariance matrix calculated from a DataFrame of residuals. In each simulation, first I compute the predicted number of possessions using the GBR model output, draw the error from a normal distribution with mean = 0, standard deviation = model RMSE, then sum the two. Noting the lack of a symmetry constraint for GBR models and the fact that both teams should have roughly the same number of possessions, I average the predicted number of possessions for the two teams and use the average moving forward. I then compute each component sequentially and the errors for each are drawn from their conditional distribution given the already-drawn errors, using the formula,

ϵ_B | a ~ Ν(0, Σ_BB - Σ_BA Σ_AA^(-1) Σ_AB)

where Σ represents the covariance matrix, a represents the already-drawn errors for the set of variables A, and B is the new variable. This method preserves the covariance between variables and reduces variance in comparison to the naïve approach of drawing error from a normal distribution with standard deviation = model RMSE.

For each trial, I complete this simulation for both teams, calculate the predicted points scored directly from the predicted shooting statistics, and mark the team which has more predicted points as the winner, discarding any ties. I repeat this simulation for 1000 trials and compute the Monte Carlo win probability from the resulting proportion of wins for each team.

**Overall Wins Model**

The overall wins model is a Logistic Regression model which takes in team and opponent seed difference, the Monte Carlo win probability, along with additional useful team aggregate statistics, and outputs a win likelihood prediction.

I created a pipeline which first standardizes all features by removing the mean and scaling them to unit variance. I used a 10-fold cross validation to select the model hyperparameters which minimize log loss. Like the component models, I used an iterative process for feature selection. The candidate feature list included information about the team seeding, predictions from the Monte Carlo model, the difference in standard statistics like turnovers per game for both teams, along with engineered statistics like free throw attempts per field goal attempted and ratio of three-point shots to two-point shots. I also gathered additional features like the number of rest days ahead of the Round of 64, conference tournament win percentage, and games played over the week ahead of the tournament. Like the process used with the component models, I trained and validated the model, then evaluated the effect of adding or removing each of the candidate features by re-training it with a modified feature set, then committing changes which had a non-trivial positive effect on model log loss.

For the overall wins model, I considered using a Gradient Boosting Regressor model, knowing they can model more complex relationships between the features and the target than a Logistic Regression model. My data is structured so that each matchup is evaluated twice, once with either team listed as the team in focus and the other listed as the opponent. Many of the features in their raw state have an antisymmetric property (DIFF_FTA for Team1 = -1 * DIFF_FTA for Team2). Additionally, the Standard Scaler pre-processing creates this antisymmetry in the Monte Carlo win probability feature. Logistic Regression predicts:

P(win | x) = σ(wᵀx + b) = 1 / (1 + e^(-(wᵀx + b)))

With the asymmetry present, x₂ = -1 * x₁, so:

P(win | x₂) = σ(wᵀx₂ + b) = 1 - σ(wᵀx₁ + b) = 1 - P(win | x₁)

Thanks to the properties of Logistic Regression, the probability of Team1 winning and Team2 winning will sum to 1, given the model bias is 0, and the model fits to the situational constraint. No such constraint exists for a Gradient Boosting Regressor model. I evaluated the viability of training a Gradient Boosting Regressor, then normalizing the predictions to sum to 1, but the Logistic Regression model produces better model accuracy. The best way to use a Gradient Boosting Regressor in this situation would be to reduce each matchup to a single row, but then we would need to solve the non-arbitrary problem of choosing which team is Team1. This is an opportunity for future work on this project.

**Evaluation**

Monte Carlo component model RMSE (percentage scale is 0-100):

- Possessions: 3.8489	
- FGA: 0.0625	
- 2PT%: 0.0875	
- 3PTA: 4.7104	
- 3PT%: 10.8288	
- FTA: 6.0396	
- FT%: 12.3526

Within the Monte Carlo simulation, the variance for each of these components is less than or equal to the RMSE in the table above.

The Overall Wins Model has a log loss of 0.5406 and accuracy of 0.7562 when evaluated on games from 2023-2025. A Chalk Decision Model has an accuracy of 0.7164 on the same data set (games between the same seed are treated as a coin flip with 50% accuracy). Additionally, binning the predictions by predicted probability and evaluating the actual win rate for those teams reveals the win rate is strongly correlated with the predicted values. Table available in model_outline.docx.

**Bracket Generation Strategy**

My first bracket was followed the model predictions explicitly. My second bracket chose the model predictions in the exact games where it was correct in at least 2/3 of the years it was trained on, with the caveat that if the model was imperfect, but the chalk decision model was perfect, I relied on the chalk model. Finally, if the model was correct less in less 2/3 of the years, I went against the model prediction.

Most of my remaining brackets were generated using an automated bracket generator. The bracket generator first calculates a historic upset budget for each round. This budget is the sum of the predicted probabilities that a team who was upset was predicted to win. For example, Purdue was upset by Fairleigh Dickinson in the Round of 64 in 2023. Purdue had a predicted win probability of 0.96, so 0.96 would be added to the budget. This budget is then averaged across the three years in the data set. Then I randomize the order of the matchups by round and for each matchup draw a value from a uniform 0 to 1 distribution. If the value is above the predicted probability the model favored team wins, an upset occurs and we subtract the favored team win probability from the budget. Once the budget is less than 0, all remaining games in the round see the favored team win. The budget then resets for the next round and the process repeats until we have a national champion.
